COVID-19: Outbreak update

COVID updates
Current situation
We’re working with provinces and territories on how we’ll be reporting going forward.

Map - Total Number of COVID-19 Cases in Canada - Text Description

Additional COVID-19 case information:

COVID-19 data trends
Confirmed cases in First Nations on reserve in provinces
Preliminary data tables related to confirmed cases (dataset)
COVIDTrends: cases by area
Global
An international map and data are available.

Globally, efforts have focused on taking measures to contain the outbreak and prevent further spread.

Travel advice and advisories are the Government of Canada's official source of destination-specific travel information. They give you important advice to help you to make informed decisions and to travel safely while you're abroad.

Risk to Canadians
Some people are at higher risk of more severe disease or outcomes from COVID-19 infection than others. However, there are a number of vaccines and treatments available.

The risk of getting COVID-19 varies between and within communities. Some settings and activities are also associated with higher risk of COVID-19 transmission.

We continue to reassess the public health risk based on the best available evidence as the situation evolves.

Learn more about:

People who are at risk of more severe disease or outcomes from COVID-19
Vaccines for COVID-19: How to get vaccinated
COVID-19 treatments
How Canada is monitoring COVID-19
The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provinces, territories and international partners, including the World Health Organization, to actively monitor the situation. Global efforts are focused on containment of the outbreak and the prevention of further spread.

Canada's Chief Public Health Officer of Canada is in close contact with provincial and territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health to ensure that any cases of COVID-19 occurring in Canada continue to be rapidly identified and managed in order to protect the health of Canadians.

Canada's National Microbiology Laboratory is performing diagnostic testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. The laboratory is working in close collaboration with provincial and territorial public health laboratories, which are now able to test for COVID-19.

For more information, visit the COVID-19 daily epidemiology update.

COVID-19 variants
Genetic variations of viruses, such as the one that causes COVID-19, are common and expected.

SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, will naturally develop mutations, which are changes to the genetic material in the virus over time.

When there have been several significant mutations to the virus then it’s called a variant. A variant is of concern when it affects:

disease spread
disease severity (for example, whether you have mild symptoms or require hospital care)
tests used to detect the virus
protection from previous infection, vaccines or treatments
Monitoring the variants
Monitoring for genetic changes in the virus allows us to better understand the potential impact of the mutations.

The Public Health Agency of Canada works with the provinces and territories, and other partners to monitor and identify variants of concern in Canada.

Overall, variants of concern represent the majority of recently reported COVID-19 cases across the country.

Current variants of concern in Canada include:
Alpha (B.1.1.7)
Beta (B.1.351)
Gamma (P.1)
Delta (B.1.617.2)
Omicron (B.1.1.529)

Evidence demonstrates that Alpha and Delta variants are at least 50% easier to spread than the original version of the virus identified at the beginning of the pandemic. As well, the Gamma, Beta and Delta variants each have certain mutations that may have an impact on vaccine effectiveness. Early evidence suggests that Omicron is likely more transmissible than other variants of concern to date. Studies are underway to determine how much is due to:

Omicron's natural ability to spread
a reduction in immune protection following vaccination or previous infection
Variants of concern reported publicly in Canada

About the variants
Variants of concern include mutations that seem to make the virus more infectious, allowing it to spread more easily. They may also affect the severity of the disease.

At this time, there’s evidence that some variants may have an impact on certain drugs and vaccines. However, more research is needed to confirm these findings.

The variants don’t currently affect diagnosis of COVID-19 through authorized laboratory tests.

Given the limited data on the new variants, more research is needed to confirm these early findings. The Canadian and global medical, public health and research communities are actively evaluating these variants and other significant mutations.

Travel restrictions
We’ve put in place additional emergency measures to slow the introduction and spread of COVID-19 in Canada. Restrictions may change with little notice as the situation evolves. Refer to the latest travel restrictions in Canada.

Contact us
If you're looking for information on COVID-19, specific to your province, refer to our provincial and territorial resources page.

If you have additional questions that aren't answered, contact the Public Health Agency of Canada.

COVID-19 symptoms
Symptoms of COVID-19 can vary:

from person to person
in different age groups
depending on the COVID-19 variant

Some of the more commonly reported symptoms include:
sore throat
runny nose
sneezing
new or worsening cough
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
temperature equal to or more than 38°C
feeling feverish
chills
fatigue or weakness
muscle or body aches
new loss of smell or taste
headache
abdominal pain, diarrhea and vomiting
feeling very unwell

If you don’t feel well or if you have any symptoms, even if mild, assume you may have COVID-19. Immediately isolate at home and away from others. Check with your local public health authority for more advice, including where and how to get tested if recommended.

You may be infected but not have symptoms. However, you can still spread the virus to others. You may:

develop symptoms later (be pre-symptomatic)
never develop symptoms (be asymptomatic)
If you’ve been in contact with someone who has COVID-19, contact your local public health authority for advice on what to do next.

Learn more about:

COVID-19: How to quarantine or isolate at home
Testing for COVID-19: When to get tested and testing results
COVID-19: Contact your local public health authority
Start of symptoms
You may start experiencing symptoms anywhere from 1 to 14 days after exposure. Typically, symptoms appear between 3 and 7 days after exposure.  

Vaccination prevents severe illness
Vaccination is one of the most effective ways to protect our families, communities and ourselves against COVID-19. Evidence indicates that the vaccines used in Canada are very effective at preventing severe illness, hospitalization and death from COVID-19.

However, vaccines are not 100% effective and you may still become infected with or without symptoms.

Learn more about:

Vaccines for COVID-19: How to get vaccinated
Public health measures
When layered together, public health measures are effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19, including variants of concern.

Regardless of your vaccination status, you should continue to:

follow the advice of your local public health authority
layer multiple individual public health measures to protect yourself and others
Learn more about:

COVID-19: Provincial and territorial resources
COVID-19: Prevention for individuals
If you have severe symptoms
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you develop severe symptoms, such as:

trouble breathing or severe shortness of breath
persistent pressure or pain in the chest
new onset of confusion
difficulty waking up or staying awake
pale, grey or blue-coloured skin, lips or nail beds
Follow instructions for safe transport if taking an ambulance or a private vehicle to a hospital or clinic.

What to do if you’re sick or were exposed
It’s important that you continue to follow the recommendations and restrictions of your local public health authority on quarantine or isolation if you:

may have COVID-19 (for example, you feel sick or have been exposed)
have tested positive for COVID-19
If you have to quarantine or isolate, follow appropriate precautions to reduce the risk of illness spreading within your home.

Adults and children with mild COVID-19 symptoms can stay at home while recovering. You don’t need to go to the hospital if symptoms are mild.

Check with your local public health authority about quarantine or isolation periods, and reporting.

Choose your local public health authority:

Learn more about:

Testing for COVID-19: When to get tested and testing results
COVID-19: How to quarantine or isolate at home
Caring for others
You may be caring for someone at home who has or may have COVID-19. If so, you should follow the appropriate precautions to reduce the risk of illness spreading within your home.

Adults and children with mild COVID-19 symptoms can stay at home while recovering. You don’t need to go to the hospital if symptoms are mild.

Learn more about:

COVID-19: How to care at home for someone who has or may have been exposed
Treating COVID-19
If you’re concerned about your symptoms, consult your health care provider. They may recommend steps or medications you can take to relieve some of your symptoms, like fever and cough.

Follow the advice of your health care provider, who may prescribe treatments.

Learn more about:

COVID-19 treatments
Long-term symptoms
Some people who become infected with COVID-19 may experience long-term symptoms, even after they recover from their initial infection. This is sometimes called post COVID-19 condition or long COVID.

Studies are underway to further understand what causes post COVID-19 condition and how to diagnose and treat it.

If you think you have this condition, talk to your health care provider about how to manage your symptoms.

How COVID-19 spreads
COVID-19 spreads from an infected person to others through respiratory droplets and aerosols (smaller droplets) created when an infected person:

breathes
coughs
sneezes
sings
shouts
talks
COVID-19 can also spread by touching something that has the virus on it, then touching your mouth, nose or eyes with unwashed hands. You can transmit COVID-19 before you start showing symptoms or without ever developing symptoms.

Learn more about:

COVID-19: Main modes of transmission
COVID-19 symptoms
Vaccination
Evidence indicates that vaccines are effective at preventing serious outcomes due to COVID-19, such as severe illness, hospitalization and death.

However, there's a small percentage of the population who are vaccinated that may still be infected with COVID-19 if they're exposed to the virus. As a result, you may be asked to get a COVID-19 test.

Your vaccination status only changes your risk of getting COVID-19 and becoming sick. It doesn't change your risk of exposure to the virus out in the community.

Vaccination is also the best prevention against post COVID-19 condition. Post COVID-19 condition refers to symptoms some individuals experience for weeks or months after being infected with COVID-19. Symptoms can be very different from those during the initial infection.

The condition can affect both adults and children.

Learn more about:

COVID-19 vaccines
COVID-19: How to get vaccinated
COVID-19: Proof of vaccination
Post COVID-19 condition
 Flu vaccination
Prevention for individuals
While vaccines are having a significant impact on controlling the spread of COVID-19, the virus continues to circulate. Ongoing efforts continue across Canada to:

increase overall vaccine coverage
decrease the spread of COVID-19
Public health measures remain an important part of our response to COVID-19 because:

although COVID-19 vaccines approved for use in Canada provide substantial protection against severe illness, no vaccine is 100% effective
we now know that protection may decrease over time
we've learned that fully vaccinated individuals can still be infected and transmit the COVID-19 virus
however, this is less likely to occur among fully vaccinated individuals than for those who are unvaccinated or partially vaccinated
as it gets colder and when more of our activities move indoors, we may come into closer contact with others outside of our household
Individual public health measures are actions you can take to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 and other illnesses, like flu. We've previously referred to these measures as personal preventive practices. These measures are most effective when layered together and used alongside vaccination.

Many individual public health measures were practised before COVID-19 to prevent the spread of other infectious illnesses. They should continue to be part of your everyday practices, today and always. This includes things like staying home when sick and regular hand hygiene. For the time being, you should also continue to wear a mask and maximize your physical distance from others for additional layers of protection.

You're encouraged to follow all individual public health measures regardless of your vaccination status. Recommendations for some measures are expected to change over time in response to the current COVID-19 situation.

Public health advice varies widely across Canada due to local situations. It's important that you:

continue to follow the recommendations and restrictions of your local public health authority
assess the risks before going out and make informed decisions to keep yourself and others safe
At this time, it's unknown if COVID-19 will completely go away. Outbreaks or more seasonal patterns may begin to emerge, as seen with colds and flu.

Learn more about:

Going out safely during COVID-19 (printable poster)
 Stay at home when you're sick
 Improve ventilation
 Wear a mask
 Practise physical distancing
 Use caution in closed spaces and crowded places
 Practise hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette
 Clean and disinfect surfaces and objects
 Follow all travel-related measures
Prevention for communities
As COVID-19 continues to circulate in Canada, governments and public health authorities will continue to:

make public health decisions to prevent and reduce the spread of COVID-19
monitor COVID-19 activity and vaccination coverage in their area and adjust public health restrictions and recommendations as needed
respond to and manage outbreaks in various communities and settings, particularly when occurring among people who are at risk of more severe disease or outcomes
Planners, administrators, operators and employers must work together to protect:

customers
employees
the general public
remote and isolated communities
people at greater risk of exposure to COVID-19
people at risk of more severe disease or outcomes from COVID-19
Canada is also supporting Indigenous communities as they continue to monitor and respond to COVID-19.


Risks of getting COVID-19
The risk of getting COVID-19 is evolving daily and varies between and within communities. Risk is dependent on:

how many people in the community are vaccinated:
the level of COVID-19 activity in the community, including variants of concern
how well people follow public health measures that are recommended by local public health authorities
To protect yourself and others:

get vaccinated against COVID-19
be mindful of the risk of exposure to the virus
assess the risks and consider what individual public health measures you can follow when you're around people outside of your immediate household
this is even more important if you or others are partially vaccinated or unvaccinated
consistently follow public health recommendations and restrictions where you live

